# Xan zine: September 2024 Edition

As usual, upgrade to the latest version (at least 0.18.0) using:

```bash
cargo install xan
```

So many things to say and so little time... This newest entry of the zine will most likely look like a changelog of sorts, rather than the usual detailed chronicles.

## Summary

- [--source-column](#--source-column)
- [Miscellaneous moonblade](#miscellaneous-moonblade)

## --source-column

The `xan cat rows` command and the `xan merge` commands now both support a `--source-column` flag that takes the name of a column to prepend containing the name of the original file of each row.

## Miscellaneous moonblade

- `moonblade` should be more performant, and use less memory.
- `&&` and `||` semantics are now aligned on most interpreted programming languages (they short-circuit and return the last relevant value, not cast to boolean).
- added `min`, `max`, `argmin` (I blame @jimenaRL), `argmax` functions.
- added `mean` function, working with lists.
- adding `cols` and `headers` functions, so you can do `argmin(cols(), headers())` (again, I blame @jimenaRL).
- `contains` function and `in` operator now works for lists and maps, as expected.
- the `write` function is now fully threadsafe.
- added `copy` and `move` functions to move files around.
- added `keys` and `values` functions to work with maps.
- it is now possible to index strings, list, maps etc. `map["key"]`, `list[-1]`, for instance.
- it is now possible to slice strings and list like with python `list[1:3]`, `list[1:]` etc.
- `get` now accepts a nested path as a list.